Welcome to the E-Bhashakosha											

Welcome to the electronic version of the Purnachandra Oriya Bhashakosha compiled by Gopal Chandra Praharaj during the 1930’s. This CD contains the entire 7-volume work along with a word index linked to appropriate pages.

The E-Bhashakosha consists of a set of pdf (portable document format) files which can be viewed on any computer independent of the operating system and without the need to install any fonts. To view the pdf files you must have a pdf reader installed on your computer. These readers are all available free of cost. One of the most widely used pdf readers is the Adobe Acrobat Reader, version 6 of which is included in this CD. This will work both on Windows 98 and XP. Linux readers are generally included with the distributions. That for Mac can be downloaded from the Adobe site.

The E-Bhashakosha can be run from the CD directly or can be installed on the hard disk. The later is preferable if regular use is expected - it will require about 700 MB disk space.

1. If your computer does not have it already, please install the Acrobat Reader 6.0 by double clicking the exe file on the CD. Any other reader will also work.

A. Running from the CD:
2a. Navigate to the CD drive in the Windows Explorer or My Computer and display the contents. Double click on the Mukhashala.pdf (Index file) to open it in the Acrobat Reader. It can also be opened from within the Acrobat Reader by clicking on the FILE menu and choosing OPEN and then by choosing the file on the CD. To continue running from the CD please proceed to step 3 below.

B. Installing on the Hard Disk:
2b. Copy the entire E-Bhashakosha folder onto a suitable location on your hard drive. Make sure beforehand that it has sufficient disc space (about 700 MB) free. It is important that the Mukhashala file and the Garbhagruha folder always remain under the same parent folder and are not renamed. It is helpful to create a shortcut to the Mukhashala.pdf file in the start menu and/or desktop by right clicking on the file and dragging onto the desired locations. The shortcut can be associated with the  icon provided on the CD (/Icon/E-Bhashakosha.ico)

The E-Bhashakosha can now be launched with the shortcut or by navigating to E-Bhashakosha folder on the hard disk and double clicking on the Mukhashala.pdf file

The following steps are common to running either from the CD or from the hard disk
3. The cover page of the Mukhashala will appear in the Acrobat Reader window which will give you the links to all other sections. You can jump to the desired section by clicking on the appropriate link. A link can be identified by moving the cursor (hand tool) over it - the palm shaped pointer will change to a hand with a pointing finger when a link is encounterd.

4. On the first use please look through all the pages by clicking on the NEXT button on the page bottom or on the navigation panel of the Acrobat Reader. The preface will give you a little background on the present work and our future hopes.

5. The Acrobat Reader on your computer may need to be configured to facilitate the use of this E-Bhashakosha. The next section (How to use) describes this.

6. The next section is an index of alphabets which are linked to the index words in the Bhashakosh. Clicking on any letter will take you to the page which lists the words starting with that letter.

7. The index words are the pairs of words appearing on the top of every page of any dictionary and give the first and the last words on the page. Such word-pairs for every page of the Bhashakosha are listed here. Clicking on the appropriate pair will open a new pdf file (Garbhagruha files and stored under the Garbhagruha folder on the CD). 

8. If the Acrobat Reader is configured as suggested, the new file will open in a separate window without closing the Mukhashala (Index) file. The two open files, Mukhashala and one of the Garbhagruha files, can be viewed side by side by choosing from the Acrobat menu bar Window>Tile>Vertically (or by typing Control+Shift+L all together).  

9. The magnification of each of the file windows can be varied by clicking on the file and choosing the appropriate magnification from the view menu or from the tool bar. Many other facilities are available in the Reader - please acquaint yourself with these from the help.

10. You can now move back to the index file and choose any other words and open the linked file. Several files can be kept open at the same time, but it will slow your system down and may also create confusion. Hence it is better to have only one Garbhagruha file at a time along with the Mukhashala file.

Please Note
11. The Bhashakosha pages are prepared from scanned images and because of the old printing and paper staining and other damage it may be difficult to read at places. The Acrobat Reader provides facility for enlarging the page views upto 800%. You can get around most difficulties by experimenting with this and with the other helpful features of the Reader.

12. The pages can be printed out as images, but copying as text is not possible. The sections containing English text can be converted into editable text through any Optical Character Recognition (OCR) application. Unfortunately, this technology for Oriya script is still a very distant dream. 

Please enjoy browsing through the E-Bhashakosha and give us your feedback. With everyone's contribution we can bring out a more useful version in future. Please send your comments to:

Bhashakosha@gmail.com 

Please visit the website http://Bhashakosha.googlepages.com/ for a variety of materials on Oriya language to be published from time to time. All updates will also be posted there.

(E-Bhashakosha v1.0, November 2006, GPL © Srujanika, srujanika@gmail.com)

The contents of this CD can be copied, modified and redistributed without any restriction as long as the same is not charged for except nominally to cover the expenses.